# Sorting Algorithms
Sorting algorithms are used to rearrange a given array or list elements according to a comparison operator on the elements. The comparison operator is used to decide the new order of element in the respective data structure. For example, the numerical order is a commonly used sequence but a lexicographical order is also a commonly used sequence type. There are several types of sorting algorithms: quick sort, bubble sort, merge sort, insertion sort, selection sort, heap sort, radix sort, bucket sort among others. Each has its own properties and are suited to specific types of tasks and data.
# Bubble Sort
Bubble Sort is a simple sorting algorithm that works by repeatedly swapping the adjacent elements if they are in the wrong order. It gets its name because with each iteration the largest element “bubbles” up to its proper location. It continues this process of swapping until the entire list is sorted in ascending order. The main steps of the algorithm are: starting from the beginning of the list, compare every pair of adjacent items and swap them if they are in the wrong order, and then pass through the list until no more swaps are needed. However, despite being simple, Bubble Sort is not suited for large datasets as it has a worst-case and average time complexity of O(n²), where n is the number of items being sorted.
# Merge Sort
Merge sort is a type of sorting algorithm that follows the divide-and-conquer paradigm. It was invented by John von Neumann in 1945. This algorithm works by dividing an unsorted list into n partitions, each containing one element (a list of one element is considered sorted), then repeatedly merging partitions to produce new sorted lists until there is only 1 sorted list remaining. This resulting list is the fully sorted list. The process of dividing the list is done recursively until it hits the base case of a list with one item. Merge sort has a time complexity of O(n log n) for all cases (best, average and worst), which makes it highly efficient for large data sets.
# Quick Sort
Quicksort, also known as partition-exchange sort, is an efficient, in-place sorting algorithm, which uses divide and conquer principles. It was developed by Tony Hoare in 1959. It operates by selecting a ‘pivot’ element from the array and partitioning the other elements into two sub-arrays, according to whether they are less than or greater than the pivot. The sub-arrays are then recursively sorted. This process continues until the base case is achieved, which is when the array or sub-array has zero or one element, hence is already sorted. Quicksort can have worst-case performance of O(n^2) if the pivot is the smallest or the largest element in the array, although this scenario is rare if the pivot is chosen randomly. The average case time complexity is O(n log n).
